In this section of the course,
we will learn about security
and access control in Linux.
We will first get introduced
to the basic security concepts,
such as account types in Linux,
access control files,
switching users,
and privilege escalation.
We will then learn how to create
and manage new users
followed by managing file-level ownership
and permissions.
After each topic,
you will get to practice these topics
in the hands-on labs.
Security in Linux is a very vast topic
and involves many concepts.
Access control methods make use of user
and password-based authentication
to determine who can access the systems.
There is the PAM
which stands for
Pluggable Authentication Model
and it is another way
of managing authentication in Linux.
It is normally used to authenticate users
to programs and services in Linux.
Network Security is used to restrict
or allow access to services
listening on the Linux server.
While we commonly rely
on external firewalls to do this,
it can also be set up within the Linux system
by making use of tools
such as IPTables and Firewalld.
SSH stands for Secure Shell
and it is used for remote access
to a server over an unsecured network.
SSH hardening can help make sure
only the authorized users
gain access to the server.
SE Linux makes use of security policies
for isolating applications running
on the same system from each other
to protect the Linux server.
Besides these, there are several other ways
to secure the Linux operating system.
In this section, we will take a look
at basic access control in Linux
and learn about file ownership
and permissions.
Before we understand the concepts
around access control,
we first have to learn
about accounts in Linux.
What is an account?
Every user in Linux
has an associated account.
The user account maintains information
such as the username and password
used to log into the system.
Besides this, a user account
also contains an identifier called UID
which is unique for each user in the system.
The information about a user account
is stored in /etc/passwd file.
A Linux group is a collection of users.
It is used to organize users
based on common attributes
such as role or a function.
The information about groups
is stored in the /etc/group file.
Each group has a unique identifier
called the GID.
Suppose we have two developers
called Bob and Michael
who have similar roles
and work on the same system.
We can group them in a Linux group
called developers.
By doing this,
we can grant them the same access
to specific files
and directories in the file system.
We will see how to do that a bit later.
Let's now break down the user account
based on the information it stores.
Each user has a username
and a unique ID assigned to them
known as the user ID or UID.
The user also has a GID,
the ID of the group they are part of.
A user can be part of multiple groups.
If no group is specified
when the user is created,
it assigns the user to a group
with the same ID and name as the user ID.
That's the primary GID of the user.
The user account also stores information
about the home directory of the user
in the default shell.
You can check these by running the ID command
followed by the username.
It lists the UID, username, GID,
and the groups the user is part of.
To check the home directory path
and the default shell assigned to the user,
we can inspect the /etc/passwd file
like this.
We will learn more about this file in a bit.
The example we just saw
with the user called Michael
is an example of a user account.
A user account refers to individual people
who need access to the Linux system.
There are some other types of accounts.
A super user account is the root
which has the UID 0.
The super user has unrestricted access
and control over the system,
including other users.
System accounts are usually created
during the OS installation.
These are for use by software and services
that will not run as the super user.
UIDs for system accounts
are usually under 100
or between 500-1,000.
They usually do not have
a dedicated home directory.
If they do,
the home directory is not created under /home.
SSHD and the mail user
are examples of the system account.
Service accounts are similar
to system accounts
and are created
when services are installed in Linux.
For example, an nginx service makes use
of a service account called nginx.
To see details about users
in the Linux system,
we can make use of some simple commands.
We already saw the use
of the command called ID.
This command gives information
about the user,
specifically the UID, the GID,
and what other groups the user is part of.
To see the list of users
currently logged into the system,
run the command, WHO.
The LAST command displays the record
of all logged-in users.
It also shows the date and time
when the system was rebooted.
Let's now see the different ways
in which you can switch
from one user to another in Linux.
We saw how to do this earlier
with the sudo command
when we had to run commands as the root user.
Another way to do it
is to use the SU command.
With SU, you can switch
to any other user in the system,
including root.
You can also run a specific command
using SU dash-C option
like this.
It is, however, not recommended to be used
as it needs the password of the user
you are switching to.
The better way to do this
is to make use of sudo.
As we saw earlier,
the sudo command offers another approach
to giving users administrative access.
When trusted users precede
an administrative command with sudo,
they are prompted for their own password.
The default configuration for sudo
is defined under /etc/sudoers file.
This file defines the policies applied
by the sudo command
and can be updated using the visudo command.
Only users listed in the /etc/sudoers file
can make use of the sudo command
for privilege escalation.
This is an added security measure
that prevents other users
from running commands as the root users.
The administrator can give
a granular level of access with sudo.
In this case,
Bob has complete administrative privileges.
However, the user called Sara
can only use sudo to reboot the system.
With sudo enabled,
we can eliminate the need
for ever logging in as root user directly.
We can do this by setting a nologin shell
for the root user like this.
With a nologin shell set,
no one can log into the system
using the root user and password directly.
Let us now look
at the syntax of the sudoers file.
All lines that begin with a hash
or a pound symbol are comments
and are not applied.
The first field is either the user
or the group to which privileges
have been granted.
Groups begin with a percentage symbol.
The second field which by default
is left to the value ALL
specifies the host in which the user
can make use of privilege escalation.
In a normal setup,
there is just one host
which is the localhost.
As a result, the value ALL
implies the localhost as well.
The third field enclosed in brackets
implies the users and groups.
The user in the first field
can run the command as.
This is normally left
to the default value of ALL.
This implies that any user, not just root,
can be used to run the commands.
The fourth field is the command
that can be run.
You can specify ALL
which means the user
can run any command without restrictions.
Or, you can specify individual commands
such as the "shutdown dash r now"
as in the case of the user called Sara.
This means that Sara can use sudo
only to reboot the system and nothing else.